UNREVISED HANSARD
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
TUESDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2020
Page: 1
TUESDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2020
____
PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
____
The House met at 14:00.
House Chairperson Ms M G Boroto took the Chair and requested
members to observe a moment of silence for prayer or
meditation.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): Hon members, I would
like to remind you that on 4 December 2019 the House adopted
the Rules Committee report which introduced a number of
amendments to our rules. Some of the amendments pertain to the
sequence of proceedings and Members’ Statements. To facilitate
sufficient opportunity for Ministers’ Responses to Members’
Statements, the sequence of proceedings has been amended so
that Members’ Statements are now at the start of the
proceedings on days that they are scheduled by the programming
committee.
UNREVISED HANSARD
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
TUESDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2020
Page: 2
The Rules Committee further agreed that the number of
Ministers’ Responses be increased from six to seven and that
time allowed for Ministers’ Responses be increased from two
minutes to three minutes.
With that background, I will now take the first item on the
Order Paper which is Members’ Statements. Does any member of
the ANC wish to make a statement?
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Sorry Chair, on a point of
order.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): Please take your seat.
Yes, what’s your point of order?
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: I’m terribly sorry to the
hon member for disrupting him, but House Chair, I have to just
look around this House and I think we need to note that there
is one Minister in the House. So, we are about to do
ministerial statements but there are not any Ministers in the
House to hear them.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): I’m looking around the
House and I can say that I see a Minister and two Deputy
UNREVISED HANSARD
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
TUESDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2020
Page: 3
Ministers ... [Interjections.] ... and I believe ... Oh, I’m
sorry, mama De Lille. I’m very sorry. I always look this side.
My apologies. Mama De Lille is there. Let’s hope that as we
continue they will arrive because these are the rules that we
all adopted. Yes, hon Mente?
Ms N V MENTE: House Chair, to say we must proceed ... they
will arrive ... how will they respond to something they did
not hear?
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): We have others that
will respond ... [Inaudible.] ... in the House.
Ms N V MENTE: No, no, no, no, no, no, the rule does not say
that.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): The rule says seven ...
yes, opportunities.
Ms N V MENTE: Yes, they are three now. They are currently
three.
UNREVISED HANSARD
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
TUESDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2020
Page: 4
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): Hon Mahlangu, how do we
resolve this? We will resolve it together. Let’s resolve it
together.
Ms N V MENTE: Go to the next item on the Order Paper and then
we can come back to statements.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): After having adopted
the rules I have to get advice because I can’t just flout the
rules that we have adopted. Hon Chief Whip?
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon House Chairperson, I
want to support the move that ... let’s start with the next
item. However, I must say it is uncalled for that we don’t
have Ministers and Deputy Ministers in the House when they
knew that Statements was going to be the first item. Thank
you. [Applause.]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): Thank you. I think that
is the wish of the members in the House. As the Chief Whip has
spoken and supports what you are saying, and I am advised by
Mr Mahlangu that it is okay, I will proceed that way.
UNREVISED HANSARD
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
TUESDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2020
Page: 5
CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY LAWS AMENDMENT BILL
There was no debate.
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Thank you very much,
House Chair. As indicated on the Order Paper ...
IsiXhosa:
...ndiphakamisa ukuba lo Mthetho-siHlomelo oYilwayo wemiThetho
yezobuNzululwazi nobuChwepheshe wamkelwe.
Motion agreed to.
Report accordingly adopted.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY LAWS AMENDMENT BILL
(Second Reading debate)
The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY:
Thank you very much House Chairperson, the Deputy President,
Cabinet colleagues, members of the Portfolio Committee on
Higher Education and the chairperson hon Mapulane, and hon
UNREVISED HANSARD
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
TUESDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2020
Page: 6
members, as a department we committed ourselves to position
Science and Technology as a catalyst towards faster economic
growth and development. Whilst we acknowledge the challenges
facing a number of our state-owned enterprises, SOEs, there
are nevertheless those that are responding very positively to
the challenges of our country.
This Bill will ensure that effectively we will be able to
harness the achievements of our SOEs. For instance, through
the SA National Space Agency, the South African MeerKAT
project has been completed on time and within the budget of
R3,2 billion. The benefits of hosting these telescopes include
a 75% local content component and direct investment of more
than R300 million in the Northern Cape by the SA Radio
Astronomy Observatory alone.
Through the Technology Innovation Agency we continue to
harness the latest advances in smart agriculture. In this
regard, we are substantially expanding the agriculture and
agroprocessing sector by supporting key value chains and
products, developing new markets and reducing our reliance on
agricultural imports.
IsiZulu:
UNREVISED HANSARD
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
TUESDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2020
Page: 7
Ngobuchwepheshe siwuHulumeni senza ngcono ulwazi ekutheni
senze izimpilo zabantu zibe ngcono. Kungakho sizoguqula
lemithetho namhlanje.
English:
There had been an inconsistent and unco-ordinated management
of public entities reporting to our Ministry, with different
requirements that regulate their operations.
The main reason for this Bill before you today is not to
simply ensure greater administrative efficiency, cost
containment and strategic alignment, but it also aims to drive
the postschool knowledge and skills development imperatives
more decisively.
An important dimension towards the realisation of our
objectives is that of harmonising the statutory provisions
which regulate the operations of all public entities falling
under our Ministry. This Bill seeks to, amongst others,
harmonise the processes for the determination of the
remuneration and allowances of the members and committees of
boards or councils. The Bill also makes provision for the
termination of membership of boards of the entities, as well
as the disqualification of members or potential members from
UNREVISED HANSARD
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
TUESDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2020
Page: 8
the membership of such boards. The Bill also seeks to
harmonise the processes for the appointment of chief executive
officers, CEOs, of the entities.
The amendments will also correct the anomalous situation where
the Minister has had no say in the appointments of CEOs of
some of our entities and would thus make provision for
consultation with the Minister during the appointment of such
CEOs.
In the process of preparing this Bill, all interested and
affected stakeholders were consulted individually and the Bill
was published in the Government Gazette for public comment in
November 2017.
In this context, it is crucial that we ensure that the
nation’s future science, technology and innovation paradigm is
grounded on tried and tested principles of good governance.
IsiZulu:
Sethemba ukuthi amalungu ahloniphekile aleNdlu azoweseka
awuphasise loMthethosivivinyo ukuze siqubeke nalo msebenzi
omuhle esiwenzayo wokusebenzisa ubuchwepheshe ukuze senze
izimpilo zabantu bakithi zibe ngcono. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.]
UNREVISED HANSARD
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
TUESDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2020
Page: 9
Mr M P MAPULANE: House Chair, hon Minister Nzimande, hon
members, fellow South Africans, the Deputy President, it gives
great pleasure to present the committee report and to
participate in this debate on the Science and Technology Laws
Amendment Bill 42 of 2018.
The Bill was introduced and referred to the Fifth Parliament’s
Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology on 1 November
2018. On 5 December 2018, in terms of the joint rule 160 sub-
rule 6 the joint taking mechanism classified the Science and
Technology Laws Amendment Bill as a section 75 Bill.
The committee calls for public submissions on the Science and
Technology Laws Amendment Bill from the 1 to 15 February 2019.
However, because the Bill focuses exclusively on the
operational and administrative governance procedures of the
entities that report to the Department of Science and
Innovation, no submissions were received from the public.
The process to consider the amendment proposed by the Science
and Technology Laws Amendment Bill was done in collaboration
with the Parliament’s Legal Services, the Office of the State
Law Advisor and the Department of Planning, Monitoring and
Evaluation. The Department of Planning, Monitoring and
UNREVISED HANSARD
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
TUESDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2020
Page: 10
Evaluation exempted the department from the application of the
socioeconomic impact assessment in respect of the Bill since
it did not directly affect the public.
The department briefed the committee on the Bill on 20
February 2019, two of the committee meetings on 27 and 6 March
were dedicated to the clause by clause consideration and the
adoption of the clause by clause amendments and the
committee’s report on the Bill, which the committee’s report
on the Bill and the allies were published on 11 March 2019.
However, the committee’s report was not considered by the NA
due to the conclusion of the of the Fifth Parliament’s term.
The Bill was subsequently revived by this August House of the
Sixth Parliament last year on 29 October and referred to the
Portfolio Committee on Higher Education Science and
Technology.
Following the briefing by the department on 20 November, the
committee considered the Bill and the amendments effected by
the previous portfolio committee and we are satisfied that the
substance and the processes followed are in order and
therefore are confident that this House can adopt the Science
and Technology Amendment Bill as adopted.
UNREVISED HANSARD
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
TUESDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2020
Page: 11
The objectives of the Science and Technology Laws Amendment
Bill are to ensure that the same governance principles and
operational procedures are applied across the public entities
that report to the Department of Science and Innovation. In
doing so, to negate the inconsistent, inadequate and
uncoordinated management of these entities, each of which have
their own principle acts. The standardisation of governance
and operational procedures of the public entities that report
to the department allows the department to efficiently manage
its administrative relationship with entities as well as more
effective and strategic oversight of the entity boards and
council.
It also affords the department through the Minister a voice in
the appointment of the entity’s Chief Executive Officers and
ensuring fiduciary responsibility with regard to the
remuneration and allowance of board and council members and
their committees.
The so called harmonisation has started by the department
during the fourth term of Parliament and has so far resulted
in two amendment acts being passed and that is the Science and
Technology Laws Amendment 16 of 2011 and the Science and
Technology Laws Amendment Act 7 of 2014. The current Science
UNREVISED HANSARD
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
TUESDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2020
Page: 12
and Technology Laws Amendment Bill specifically focus on the
following five principal acts which are: the 2001 Academy of
Science of South Africa Act; the 2008 Human Science Research
Act 1998; the Science Research Council Act of 2008; the South
African National Space Agency Act; and the Technology
Innovation Act.
The Bill seeks to standardise the processes for the
termination of the membership of the boards or council,
clarify the requirements for the disqualification of persons
of membership of council and provide for the appointment of
external persons to committees.
It also ensures that the Minister responsible for science and
innovation can determine the remuneration and allowances of
the boards and council and their allowance.
The 1996 White Paper on science and technology introduced a
concept of a national system of innovation which is defined as
a network of institutions, organisations and policies that
work together to achieve a common set of social and economic
goals and objectives for the development of science and
technology in our country.
UNREVISED HANSARD
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
TUESDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2020
Page: 13
The department is responsible for developing, coordinating and
managing the system of innovation together with the eight
entities. However, 23 years after the promulgation of the 1996
White Paper on Science and Technology and following a number
of reviews of the national system of innovation in the 1996
White Paper, including the recent approval by Cabinet of a new
White Paper on Science and Technology and Innovation in March
2019, the various reviews of the National System of
Innovation, NSI, and the White Paper show that despite
significant progress, challenges remain in attaining the ideal
in the 1996 White Paper. Therefore, South Africa is not yet
fully benefited from the potential Science, Technology and
Innovation, STI, to advance the economy and improve the
livelihoods of its citizens.
Key challenges constraining the performance of NSI are the
inadequate and collaborative means of national STI agenda
sitting, insufficient policy coherence, coordination, weak
partnership and so forth.
Now, a notable observation from the 2016/17 research and
experimental development survey show that higher education
sector was the largest contributed to the overall increase in
the gross expenditure on research and development of
UNREVISED HANSARD
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
TUESDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2020
Page: 14
R827 million in constant 2010 values. The higher education
sector contributed an amount of 790 to the increase in
research and development. The research and development in the
business sector increased by only 0.2% with State-owned
enterprises, SOEs, contributing R365 million which is
calculated in constant 2010 values to this. The private that
is business sector excluding the SOEs showed a decrease in
research and development expenditure in constant 2010 values.
The government sector decreased by 2.4%, whereas the science
sector showed a marginal growth.
Therefore it is our call hon members to the business sector
that they need to up their games and increase the investment
in research and development so that the country is able to
attain the 1.4% expenditure on the Gross domestic product,
GDP, by 2019. We believe that this Science and Technology Laws
Amendment Bill will contribute significantly towards that
increase in research and development. I thank you
Ms C V KING: Hon House Chairperson, the scientific perspective
of the world, especially the living world, inexorably
impresses on us a dynamic picture of the world of entities and
structures involved in continuous and incessant change and in
process without ceasing.
UNREVISED HANSARD
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
TUESDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2020
Page: 15
The proposed amendments of this Bill are of a technical nature
which seeks to harmonise the operations of entities in the
science and technology sector to strengthen oversight and
governance. Considering the technical nature of the Science
and Technology Laws Amendment Bill, the initial introduction
at the end of the Fifth Parliament, did little justice on
discussion and consultation.
Improper norms and standards for entities resulted in
inconsistent, inadequate and unco-ordinated management of
public entities with different requirements regulating the
operations and governance.
On this basis this Bill seeks to harmonise the processes for
termination of membership of boards of entities, to clarify
the requirements for disqualification of persons from
membership of boards and to provide for the appointment of
external persons to committees of the boards.
Considering the recent flawed processes of public entity
boards as highlighted in the state capture reports, these
amendments are crucial to ensure that the Minister and
UNREVISED HANSARD
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
TUESDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2020
Page: 16
chairpersons do not have autonomy over the boards and to
ensure that any amendment holds constitutional muster.
The Western Cape government in its submission of the Bill
expressed the importance of fit for purpose when appointed to
the boards, the inclusion of an appeals committee and the
chief executive officer, CEO’s term of office. Clause 22
interpretation of being convicted of fraud, corruption or any
other crime involving dishonesty, within a period of 10 years
preceding the date of nomination can be left open for abuse.
The time period should have been realistically considered.
Also placing the responsibility of determining fit for purpose
in the domain of the court of law is limiting and should have
been added an additional insertion of “or a competent
tribunal”.
The DA was in favour of deleting any clauses that were
contrary to the Public Finance Management Act and the
insertion of the disclosure of conflict of interest clause.
All inputs from various stakeholders were brought into
fruition in this Bill. A lethargic process to ensure enactment
should be avoided as happened in the previous Parliament
regarding this Bill.
UNREVISED HANSARD
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
TUESDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2020
Page: 17
Change is scientific; progress is ethical; change is
indubitable, whereas progress is a matter of controversy. This
Bill is addressing ethical standards which should not be of a
controversial nature to hinder progress. I thank you.
[Applause.]
